Predicates and Fields
=====================

The heart of an ORM is defining the mapping between the predicates and Python objects. In Clorm
this is acheived by sub-classing the ``Predicate`` class and specifying fields that map to the
ASP predicate parameters.

The Basics
----------

It is easiest to explain this mapping by way of a simple example. Consider the following ground
atoms for the predicates ``address/2`` and ``pets/2``. It specifies that the address of the
entity ``dave`` is ``"UNSW Sydney"`` and ``dave`` has 1 pet.

.. code-block:: prolog

   address(dave, "UNSW Sydney").
   pets(dave, 1).


.. note::

   A note on ASP syntax. All predicates must start with a lower-case letter and consist of only
   alphanumeric characters (and underscore). ASP supports three basic types of *terms* (i.e.,
   the parameters of a predicate); a *constant*, a *string*, and an *integer*. Like the
   predicate names, constants consist of only alphanumeric characters (and underscore) with a
   starting lower-case character. This is different to a string, which is quoted and can
   contain arbitrary characters including spaces.

   ASP syntax also supports *complex terms* (also called *functions* but we will avoid this
   usage to prevent confusion with Python functions) which we will discuss later.

   It is significant to note that ASP does not support real number values.

To provide a mapping that satisfies the above predicate we need to sub-class the
:class:`~clorm.Predicate` class and use the :class:`~clorm.ConstantStr` type specifier as well
as the standard ``int`` and ``str`` types to define the individual terms.

.. code-block:: python

   from clorm import Predicate, ConstantStr, IntegerField, field

   class Address(Predicate):
      entity: ConstantStr
      details: str

   class Pet(Predicate):
      entity: ConstantStr
      num: int = field(IntegerField, default=0)

The type annotations specify how the fields are to be translated to Clingo. The ``entity``
fields map Python strings to ASP constants, while the ``Pet``'s ``details`` field maps Python
strings to ASP strings. In constrast the ``Pet``'s ``num`` field overrides its default ``int``
mapping by using the :py:func:`~clorm.field` function to explicitly provide the field mapping
as well as a default value. So, with the above class definitions we can instantiate some
objects:

.. code-block:: python

   fact1 = Address(entity="bob", details="Sydney uni")
   fact2 = Pet(entity="bob")
   fact3 = Pet(entity="bill", num=2)

These object correspond to the following ASP *ground atoms* (i.e., facts):

.. code-block:: prolog

   address(bob,"Sydney uni").
   pet(bob,0).
   pet(bill,2).

There are some things to note here:

* *Predicate names*: ASP uses standard logic-programming syntax, which requires that the names
  of all predicate/complex-terms begin with a lower-case letter and contain only
  alphanumeric characters or underscores. Unless overriden, Clorm will automatically generate a
  predicate name for a :class:`~clorm.Predicate` sub-class by transforming the class name based
  on some simple rules:

  * If the first letter is a lower-case character then this is a valid predicate name so the
    name is left unchanged (e.g., ``myPredicate`` => ``myPredicate``).

  * Otherwise, replace any sequence of upper-case only characters that occur at the beginning
    of the string or immediately after an underscore with lower-case equivalents. The sequence
    of upper-case characters can include non-alphabetic characters (eg., numbers) and this will
    still be treated as a single sequence of upper-case characters.

  * The above criteria covers a number of common naming conventions:

    * Snake-case: ``My_Predicate`` => ``my_predicate``, ``MY_Predicate`` => ``my_predicate``,
      ``My_Predicate_1A`` => ``my_predicate_1a``,

    * Camel-case: ``MyPredicate`` => ``myPredicate``, ``MyPredicate1A`` => ``myPredicate1A``.

    * Acronym: ``TCP1`` => ``tcp1``.

* *Field order*: the order of declared term defintions in the predicate class is important.

* *Field names*: besides the Python keywords, Clorm also disallows the following reserved
  words: ``raw``, ``meta``, ``clone``, ``sign``, and ``Field`` as these are used as properties
  or functions of a :class:`~clorm.Predicate` object.

* *Constant vs string*: In the above example ``"bob"`` and ``"Sydney uni"`` are both Python
  strings but because the ``entity`` field is declared as :class:`~clorm.ConstantStr` (or the
  explicit :class:`~clorm.ConstantField` specifier) this ensures that the Python string
  ``"bob"`` is treated as an ASP constant. Note, it is the users' responsibility to ensure that
  the Python string passed to a constant field satisfies the syntactic restrictions for a
  constant term.

* The use of a *default value*: all term types support the specification of a default value.

* It is also possible to specify a *default factory* function, using the `default_factory`
  parameter for the :py:func:`~clorm.field` function. This must be a unary function (i.e.,
  called with no arguments) that is called when the predicate/complex-term object is
  instantiated. This can be used to generated unique ids or a date/time stamp.


Overriding the Predicate Name
-----------------------------

As mentioned above, by default the predicate name is calculated from the corresponding class
name by transforming the class name to match a number of common naming conventions. However, it
is also possible to override the default predicate name with an explicit name.

There are many reasons why you might not want to use the default predicate name mapping. For
example, the Python class name that would produce the desired predicate name may already be
taken. Alternatively, you might want to distinguish between predicates with the same name but
different arities. Note: having predicates with the same name and different arities is a
legitimate and common practice with ASP programming.

.. code-block:: python

   class Address2(Predicate, name="address"):
      entity: ConstantStr
      details: str

    class Address3(Predicate, name="address"):
      entity: ConstantStr
      details: str
      country: str

Instantiating these classes:

.. code-block:: python

   shortaddress = Address2(entity="dave", details="UNSW Sydney")
   longaddress = Address3(entity="dave", details="UNSW Sydney", country="AUSTRALIA")

will produce the following matching ASP facts:

.. code-block:: prolog

   address(dave, "UNSW Sydney").
   address(dave, "UNSW Sydney", "AUSTRALIA").

Nullary Predicates
------------------

A nullary predicate is a predicate with no parameters and is also a legitimate and reasonable
thing to see in an ASP program. Defining a corresponding Python class is straightforward:

.. code-block:: python

   class ANullary(Predicate):
       pass

   fact = ANullary()

The important thing to note here is that every instantiation of ``ANullary`` will correspond to
the same ASP fact:

.. code-block:: prolog

    aNullary.

Complex Terms
-------------

So far we have shown how to create Python definitions that match predicates with simple
terms. However, in ASP it is common to also use complex terms within a predicate, such as:

.. code-block:: prolog

    booking("2018-12-31", location("Sydney", "Australia")).

The Clorm :class:`~clorm.Predicate` class definition is able to support the flexiblity required
to deal with complex terms.

.. code-block:: python

   from clorm import Predicate

   class Location(Predicate):
      city: str
      country: str

   class Booking(Predicate):
       date: str
       location: Location


.. note::

   There is also a :class:`~clorm.ComplexTerm` class which is an alias for the
   :class:`~clorm.Predicate` class. For personal stylistic reasons you may prefer to use this
   alias to define classes that will only be used as complex terms. However there are cases
   where this separation breaks down. For example when dealing with the *reification* of facts
   there is nothing to be gained by providing two definitions for the predicate and complex
   term versions of the same non logical term:

   .. code-block:: prolog

       p(q(1)).
       q(1) :- p(q(1)).

   In this example ``q/1`` is both a complex term and predicate and when providing the Python
   Clorm mapping it is simpler not to separate the two versions:

   .. code-block:: python

      class Q(Predicate):
         a: int

      class P(Predicate):
         a: Q


The predicate class containing complex terms can be instantiated in the obvious way:

.. code-block:: python

   bk=Booking(date="2018-12-31", location=Location(city="Sydney",country="Australia"))


As with the primitive terms it is possible to override the translation of complex terms, for
example to provide defaults, by using the :py:func:`~clorm.field` function.  While the first
parameter of the function must be a sub-class of :class:`~clorm.BaseField`, fortunately, every
predicate sub-class has a corresponding, internally generated, :class:`~clorm.BaseField`
sub-class which can be accessed though the :py:attr:`Field<clorm.Predicate.Field>` property of
that predicate class. So for example we can modify the ``Booking`` class definition to provide
a default location.

.. code-block:: python

   class Booking(Predicate):
       date: str
       location: Location = field(Location.Field, default=Location("Potsdam", "Germany")

   bk2=Booking(date="2019-12-14")

This second booking instance will correspond to the fact:

.. code-block:: prolog

    booking("2019-12-14", location("Potsdam", "Germany")).



Negative Facts
--------------

ASP follows standard logic programming syntax and treats the ``not`` keyword as **default
negation** (also **negation as failure**). Using default negation is important to ASP
programming as it can lead to more readable and compact modelling of a problem.

However, there may be times when having an explicit notion of negation is also useful, and
ASP/Clingo does have support for **classical negation**; indicated syntactically using the
``-`` symbol:

.. code-block:: prolog

    { a(1..2); b(1..2) }.
    -b(N) :- a(N).
    -a(N) :- b(N).

The above program chooses amongst the ``a/1`` and ``b/1`` predicates, then for every positive
``a/1`` fact, the corresponding ``b/1`` fact is negated and vice-versa. This will generate nine
stable models. For example, if ``a(2)`` and ``b(1)`` are chosen, then the corresponding
negative literals will be ``-b(2)`` and ``-a(1)`` respectively.

Note: Clingo supports negated literals as well as terms. However, tuples cannot be negated.

.. code-block:: prolog

   f(-g(a)).   % This is valid
   f(-(a,b)).  % Error!!!

Clorm supports negation for any fact or term that can be negated by Clingo. Specifying a
negative literal simply involves setting ``sign=False`` when instantiating the Predicate. Note:
unlike the field parameters, the ``sign`` parameter must be specified as a named parameter and
cannot be specified using positional arguments.

.. code-block:: python

   class P(Predicate):
       a: int

   neg_p1 = P(a=1,sign=False)
   neg_p1_alt = P(1,sign=False)
   assert neg_p1 == neg_p1_alt

Once instantiated, checking whether a fact (or a complex term) is negated can be determined
using the ``sign`` attribute of Predicate instance.

.. code-block:: python

   assert neg_p1.sign == False

Finally, for finer control of the unification process, a Predicate can be specified to only
unify with either positive or negative facts/terms by setting a ``sign`` meta attribute
declaration.

.. code-block:: python

   class P_pos(Predicate, name="p", sign=True):
       a: int

   class P_neg(Predicate, name="p", sign=False):
       a: int

   % Instatiating facts
   pos_p = P_pos(1)                     % Ok
   neg_p_fail = P_pos(1,sign=False)     % throws a ValueError

   neg_p = P_neg(1)                     % Ok
   pos_p_fail = P_neg(1,sign=False)     % throws a ValueError

   % Unifying against raw Clingo positive and negative facts
   raws = [Function("p",Number(1)), Function("p",Number(1),positive=False)]
   fb = unify([P_pos,P_neg], raw)
   assert pos_p in fb
   assert neg_p in fb

Field Definitions
-----------------

Clorm provides a number of standard classes to specify the mapping between Clingo's internal
representation (some form of ``Clingo.Symbol``) to more natural Python representations.  ASP
has three *simple terms*: *integer*, *string*, and *constant*, and Clorm provides three
standard definition classes to provide a mapping to these fields: :class:`~clorm.IntegerField`,
:class:`~clorm.StringField`, and :class:`~clorm.ConstantField`.

Clorm also provides a :class:`~clorm.SimpleField` class that can match to any simple term. This
is useful when the parameter of a defined predicate can contain arbitrary simple term
types. Clorm takes care of converting the ASP string, constant or integer to a Python string or
integer object. Note that both ASP strings and constants are both converted to Python string
objects.

In order to convert from a Python string object to an ASP string or constant,
:class:`~clorm.SimpleField` uses a regular expression to determine if the string matches the
pattern of a constant and treats it accordingly. For this reason :class:`~clorm.SimpleField`
should be used with care in order to ensure expected behaviour, and using the distinct field
types is often preferable.


Sub-classing Field Definitions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All field classes inherit from an abstract base class :class:`~clorm.BaseField`. It is possible
to define arbitrary data conversions by sub-classing :class:`~clorm.BaseField`. Clorm provides
the standard sub-classes :class:`~clorm.StringField`, :class:`~clorm.ConstantField`, and
:class:`~clorm.IntegerField`. Clorm also automatically generates an appropriate sub-class for
every :class:`~clorm.Predicate` definition for use in a complex term.

However, it is sometimes also useful to explicitly sub-class the :class:`~clorm.BaseField`
class, or sub-class one of its sub-classes. By sub-classing a sub-class it is possible to form
a *data conversion chain*. To understand why this is useful we consider an example of
specifying a date field.

Consider the example of an application that needs a date term for an event tracking
application. From the Python code perspective it would be natural to use Python
``datetime.date`` objects. However, it then becomes a question of how to encode these Python
date objects in ASP (noting that ASP only has three simple term types).

A useful encoding would be to encode a date as a string in **YYYYMMDD** format (or
**YYYY-MM-DD** for greater readability). Dates encoded in this format satisfy some useful
properties such as the comparison operators will produce the expected results (e.g.,
``"20180101" < "20180204"``). A string is also preferable to using a similiarly encoded integer
value.  For example, encoding the date in the same way as an integer would allow incrementing
or subtracting a date encoded number, which could lead to unwanted values (e.g., ``20180131 + 1
= 20180132`` does not correspond to a valid date).

So, adopting a date encoded string we can consider a date based fact for the booking
application that simply encodes that there is a New Year's eve party on the 31st December 2018.

.. code-block:: prolog

   booking("2018-12-31", "NYE party").

Using Clorm this fact can be captured by the following Python :class:`~clorm.Predicate`
sub-class definition:

.. code-block:: python

   from clorm import *

   class Booking(Predicate):
      date: str
      description: str

However, since we encoded the date as simply a ``str`` (which internally maps to
:class:`~clorm.StringField`) it is now up to the user of the ``Booking`` class to perform the
necessary translations to and from a Python ``datetime.date`` objects when necessary. For
example:

.. code-block:: python

   import datetime
   nye = datetime.date(2018, 12, 31)
   nyeparty = Booking(date=int(nye.strftime("%Y-%m-%d")), description="NYE Party")

Here the Python ``nyeparty`` variable corresponds to the encoded ASP event, with the ``date``
term capturing the string encoding of the date. In the opposite direction to extract the date
it is necessary to turn the date encoded string into an actual ``datetime.date`` object:

.. code-block:: python

   nyedate = datetime.datetime.strptime(str(nyepart.date), "%Y-%m-%d")

The problem with the above code is that the process of creating and using the date in the
``Booking`` object is cumbersome and error-prone. You have to remember to make the correct
translation both in creating and reading the date. Furthermore the places in the code where
these translations are made may be far apart, leading to potential problems when code needs to
be refactored.

The solution to this problem is to create a sub-class of :class:`~clorm.BaseField` that
performs the appropriate data conversion. However, sub-classing :class:`~clorm.Basefield`
directly requires dealing with raw Clingo ``Symbol`` objects. A better alternative is to
sub-class the :class:`~clorm.StringField` class so you only need to deal with the string to
date conversion.

.. code-block:: python

   import datetime
   from clorm import *

   class DateField(StringField):
       pytocl = lambda dt: dt.strftime("%Y-%m-%d")
       cltopy = lambda s: datetime.datetime.strptime(s,"%Y-%m-%d").date()

   class Booking(Predicate):
       date: datetime.date = field(DateField)
       description: StringField

The ``pytocl`` definition specifies the conversion that takes place in the direction of
converting Python data to Clingo data, and ``cltopy`` handles the opposite direction. Because
the :class:`~clorm.DateField` inherits from :class:`~clorm.StringField` therefore the
``pytocl`` function must output a Python string object. In the opposite direction, ``cltopy``
must be passed a Python string object and performs the desired conversion, in this case
producing a ``datetime.date`` object.

With the newly defined ``DateField`` the conversion functions are all captured within the one
class definition and interacting with the objects can be done in a more natural manner.

.. code-block:: python

    nye = datetime.date(2018,12,31)
    nyeparty = Booking(date=nye, description="NYE Party")

    print("Event {}: date {} type {}".format(nyeparty, nyeparty.date, type(nyeparty.date)))

will print the expected output:

.. code-block:: bash

    Event booking(20181231,"NYE Party"): date "2018-12-31" type <class 'datetime.date'>


.. note::

   The ``pytocl`` and ``cltopy`` functions can potentially be passed bad input. For example,
   when converting a clingo String symbol to a date object the passed string may not correspond
   to an actual date. In such cases these functions can legitimately throw either a
   ``TypeError`` or a ``ValueError`` exception. Internally, Clorm's framework will catch these
   two types of exceptions and will treat them as failures to unify when trying to unify clingo
   symbols to facts. Any other exception is passed through as a genuine error. This should be
   kept in mind if you are writing your own field class.

Restricted Sub-class of a Field Definition
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Another reason to sub-class a field definition is to restrict the set of values that the field
can hold. For example you could have an application where an argument of a predicate is
restricted to a specific set of constants, such as the days of the week.

.. code-block:: prolog

    cooking(monday, "Jane"). cooking(tuesday, "Bill"). cooking(wednesday, "Bob").
    cooking(thursday, "Anne"). cooking(friday, "Bill").
    cooking(saturday, "Jane"). cooking(sunday, "Bob").

When defining a predicate corresponding to cooking/2 it is possible to simply use a
``ConstantField`` field for the days.

.. code-block:: python

   class Cooking1(Predicate, name="cooking"):
      dow: ConstantStr
      person: str

However, this would potentiallly allow for creating erroneous instances that don't correspond
to actual days of the week (for example, with a spelling mistake):

.. code-block:: python

   ck = Cooking1(dow="mnday",person="Bob")

In order to avoid these errors it is necessary to subclass the :class:`~clorm.ConstantField` in
order to restrict the set of values to the desired set. Clorm provides a helper function
:py:func:`~clorm.refine_field` for this use-case. It dynamically defines a new class that
restricts the values of an existing field class.

.. code-block:: python

   DowField = refine_field(ConstantField,
      ["sunday","monday","tuesday","wednesday","thursday","friday","saturday"])

   class Cooking2(Predicate, name="cooking"):
      dow: ConstantStr = field(DowField)
      person:str

   ok=Cooking2(dow="monday",person="Bob")

   try:
      bad = Cooking2(dow="mnday",person="Bob")  # raises a TypeError exception
   except TypeError:
      print("Caught exception")

As well as explictly specifying the set of refinement values, :py:func:`~clorm.refine_field`
also provides a more general approach where a function/functor/lambda can be provided. This
function must take a single input and return ``True`` if that value is valid for the field. For
example, to define a field that accepts only positive integers:

.. code-block:: python

   PosIntField = refine_field(NumberField, lambda x : x >= 0)

An alternative to using :py:func:`~clorm.refine_field` to restrict the allowable values is to
an explicitly specified set is to use :py:func:`~clorm.define_enum_field`. This function allows
Clorm to be used with standard Python Enum classes. So, the day-of-week example could be
rewritten to use an Enum class:

.. code-block:: python

   import enum

   class DOW(ConstantStr, enum.Enum):
       SUNDAY="sunday"
       MONDAY="monday"
       TUESDAY="tuesday"
       WEDNESDAY="wednesday"
       THURSDAY="thursday"
       FRIDAY="friday"
       SATURDAY="saturday"

   class Cooking3(Predicate, name="cooking"):
       dow: DOW
       person: str

   ok = Cooking3(dow=DOW.MONDAY,person="Bob")

One useful advantage of using an enumeration is Clorm has built in handling to allow it to be
specified as a type annotation. This means that you do not have to explicitly call the
:py:func:`~clorm.define_enum_field` function to generate the appropriate field definition.

Finally, it should be highlighted that this mechanism for defining a field restriction works
not just for validating the inputs into an ASP program. It can also be used to filter the
outputs of the ASP solver as the invalid field values will not *unify* with the predicate.

For example, in the above program you can separate the cooks on the weekend from the weekday
cooks.

.. code-block:: python

   WeekendField = refine_field(ConstantField, ["sunday","saturday"])
   WeekdayField = refine_field(ConstantField, ["monday","tuesday","wednesday","thursday","friday"])

   class WeekendCooking(Predicate, name="cooking"):
      dow: str = field(WeekendField)
      person: str

   class WeekdayCooking(Predicate, name="cooking"):
      dow: str = field(WeekdayField)
      person: str


Using Positional Arguments
--------------------------

So far we have shown how to create Clorm predicate and complex term instances using keyword
arguments that match their defined field names, as well as accessing the arguments via the
fields as named properties. For example:

.. code-block:: python

   from clorm import *

   class Contact(Predicate):
       cid: int
       name: str

   c1 = Contact(cid=1, name="Bob")

   assert c1.cid == 1
   assert c1.name == "Bob"

However, Clorm also supports creating and accessing the field data using
positional arguments:


.. code-block:: python

   c2 = Contact(2,"Bill")

   assert c2[0] == 2
   assert c2[1] == "Bill"

While Clorm does support the use of positional arguments for predicates, nevertheless it should
be used sparingly because it can lead to brittle code that can be hard to debug, and can also
be more difficult to refactor as the ASP program changes. However, there are genuine use-cases
where it can be convenient to use positional arguments. In particular when defining very simple
tuples, where the position of arguments is unlikely to change as the ASP program changes. We
discuss Clorm's support for these cases in the following section.

Working with Tuples
-------------------

Tuples are a special case of complex terms that often appear in ASP programs. For example:

.. code-block:: none

   booking("2018-12-31", ("Sydney", "Australia")).

For Clorm tuples are simply a :class:`~clorm.Predicate` sub-class where the name of the
corresponding predicate is empty. While this can be set using an ``is_tuple`` property of the
complex term's class, Clorm also provides specialised support using the more intuitive syntax
of a Python tuple type annotations. For example, a predicate definition that unifies with the
above fact can be defined simply (using the ``DateField`` defined earlier):

.. code-block:: python

   class Booking(Predicate):
       date: datetime.date = field(DateField)
       location: Tuple[str, str]

.. note::

   For Python versions earlier than 3.9 you need to specify the tuple type using the ``Tuple``
   identifier from the ``typing`` module:

    .. code-block:: python

        from typing import Tuple

       class Booking(Predicate):
           date: datetime.date = field(DateField)
           location: Tuple[str, str]


Here the ``location`` field is defined as a pair of strings, without having to explictly define
a separate :class:`~clorm.Predicate` sub-class that corresponds to this pair. To instantiate
the ``Booking`` class a Python tuple can also be used for the values of ``location`` field. For
example, the following creates a ``Boooking`` instance corresponding to the ``booking/2`` fact
above:

.. code-block:: python

   bk = Booking(date=datetime.date(2018,12,31), location=("Sydney","Australia"))


While it is unnecessary to define a seperate :class:`~clorm.Predicate` sub-class corresponding
to the tuple, internally this is in fact exactly what Clorm does. Clorm will transform the
above definition into something similar to the following (ignoring the class and field names):

.. code-block:: python

   class SomeAnonymousName(Predicate, name=""):
      field1: str
      field2: str

   class Booking(Predicate):
       date: datetime.date = field(DateField)
       location: Tuple[str, str] = field(SomeAnonymousName.Field)

Here ``SomeAnonymousName`` has an empty name, so it will be treated as a tuple rather than a
complex term with a function name.

One important difference between the implicitly defined and explicitly defined versions of a
tuple is that the explicit version allows for field names to be given, while the implicit
version will have automatically generated names. However, for simple implicitly defined tuples
it would be more common to use positional arguments anyway, so in many cases it can be the
preferred alternative. For example:

.. code-block:: python

   bk = Booking(date=datetime.date(2018,12,31), location=("Sydney","Australia"))

   assert bk.location[0] == "Sydney"

.. note::

   As mentioned previously, using positional arguments is something that should be used
   sparingly as it can lead to brittle code that is more difficult to refactor. It should
   mainly be used for cases where the ordering of the fields in the tuple is unlikely to change
   when the ASP program is refactored.

Debugging Auxiliary Predicates
------------------------------

When integrating an ASP program into a Python based application there will be a set of
predicates that are important for inputting a problem instance and outputting a solution. Clorm
is intended to provide a clean way of interacting with these predicates.

However, there will typically be other auxiliary predicates that are used as part of the
problem formalisation. While they may not be important from the Python application point of
view they do become important during the process of developing and debugging the ASP
program. During this process it can be cumbersome to build a detailed Clorm predicate
definition for each one of these, especially when all you need to do is print the predicate
instances to the screen, possibly sorted in some order.

Clorm solves this issue by providing a factory helper function
:py:func:`~clorm.simple_predicate` that returns a :class:`~clorm.Predicate` sub-class that will
map to any predicate instance with that name and arity.

For example this function could be used for the above booking example if we wanted to extract
the ``booking/2`` facts from the model but didn't care about mapping the data types for the
individual parameters. For example to match the ASP fact:

.. code-block:: none

   booking("2018-12-31", ("Sydney", "Australia)).

instead of the explicit ``Booking`` definition above we could use the
:py:func:`~clorm.simple_predicate` function:

.. code-block:: python

   from clorm.clingo import Symbol, Function, String
   from clorm import simple_predicate

   Booking_alt = simple_predicate("booking",2)
   bk_alt = Booking_alt(String("2018-12-31"), Function("",[String("Sydney"),String("Australia")]))

Note, in this case in order to create these objects within Python it is necessary to use the
Clingo functions to explictly create ``clingo.Symbol`` objects.


Dealing with Raw Clingo Symbols
-------------------------------

As well as supporting simple and complex terms it is sometimes useful to deal with the raw
``clingo.Symbol`` objects created through the underlying Clingo Python API.

.. _raw-symbol-label:

Raw Clingo Symbols
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Clingo API uses ``clingo.Symbol`` objects for dealing with facts; and there are a number of
functions for creating the appropriate type of symbol objects (i.e., ``clingo.Function()``,
``clingo.Number()``, ``clingo.String()``).

In essence the Clorm :class:`~clorm.Predicate` class simply provides a more convenient and
intuitive way of constructing and dealing with these ``clingo.Symbol`` objects. In fact the
underlying symbols can be accessed using the ``raw`` property of a :class:`~clorm.Predicate`
instance.

.. code-block:: python

   from clorm import Predicate, ConstantStr
   from clingo import Function, String

   class Address(Predicate):
      entity: ConstantStr
      details: str

   address = Address(entity="dave", details="UNSW Sydney")

   raw_address = Function("address", [Function("dave",[]), String("UNSW Sydney")])

   assert address.raw == raw_address

.. note::

   To construct clorm objects from raw clingo symbols involves *unifying* the clingo symbol
   with the :class:`~clorm.Predicate` sub-class. This typically happens when you have a list of
   symbols corresponding to a clingo model and you want to turn them into a set of clorm facts.
   See :ref:`advanced_unification`, :ref:`api_clingo_integration`, and :py:func:`~clorm.unify`
   for details about unification.


Integrating Clingo Symbols into a Predicate Definition
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are some cases when it might be convenient to combine the simplicity and the structure of
the Clorm predicate interface with the flexibility of the underlying Clingo symbol API. For
this case it is possible to use the :class:`~clorm.RawField` class.

For example when modeling dynamic domains it is often useful to provide a predicate that
defines what *fluents* hold (i.e., are true) at a given time point, but to allow the fluents
themselves to have an arbitrary form.

.. code-block:: prolog

   time(1..5).

   holds(X,T+1) :- fluent(X), not holds(X,T).

   fluent(light(on)).
   fluent(robotlocation(roby, kitchen)).

   holds(light(on), 0).
   holds(robotlocation(roby,kitchen), 0).

In this example instances of the ``holds/2`` predicate can have two distinctly different
signatures for the first term (i.e., ``light/1`` and ``robotlocation/2``). While the definition
of the fluent is important at the ASP level, however, at the Python level we may not be
interested in the structure of the fluent, only whether it holds or not. In such a case we can
use a :class:`~clorm.RawField` to define the raw mapping from the fluent term to a Python
object.

.. code-block:: python

   from clorm import Raw, Predicate

   class Holds(Predicate):
      fluent: Raw
      time: int

:class:`~clorm.RawField` provides no data translation between ASP and Python and therefore has
the useful property that it will unify with any ``clingo.Symbol`` object; in particular in this
case it can be used to capture both the ``light/1`` and ``robotlocation/2`` complex terms.

When translating from Python to clingo, :class:`~clorm.RawField` expects objects of the type
:class:`~clorm.Raw`, and returns objects of this type when translating from clingo to
Python. :class:`~clorm.Raw` is simply a thin wrapper around the underlying ``clingo.Symbol``.

For example, to create a create a Python fact that specifies that the light is on at time 0:

.. code-block:: python

   from clingo import Function
   from clorm import Raw

   sym_lighton = Function("light", [Function("on",[])])
   lighton1 = Holds(fluent=Raw(sym_lighton), time=0)


Combining Field Definitions
---------------------------

The above example is useful for cases where you don't care about accessing the details of
individual fluents and therefore it makes sense to simply treat them as a
:class:`~clorm.RawField` complex term. However, the question naturally arises what to do if you
do want more fine-grained access to these fluents.

There are a few possible solutions to this problem, but one obvious answer is to use a field
that combines together multiple fields. Such a combined field could be specified manually by
explicitly defining a :class:`~clorm.BaseField` sub-class. However, to simplify this process
the :py:func:`~clorm.combine_fields` factory function has been provided that will return such a
combined sub-class. In fact Clorm uses standard Python union type annotation to implicitly
generate such a mapping.

With reference to the ASP code of the previous example we could add the following Python
integration:

.. code-block:: python

   from clorm import Predicate, IntegerField, ConstantField, combine_fields

   class Light(Predicate):
      status: ConstantStr

   class RobotLocation(Predicate, name="robotlocation"):
      robot: ConstantStr
      location: ConstantStr

   class Holds(Predicate):
      fluent: Light | RobotLocation
      time: int

.. note::

   For Python versions earlier than 3.11 you need to specify the union type using the ``Union``
   identifier from the ``typing`` module:

    .. code-block:: python

       from typing import Tuple

       class Holds(Predicate):
          fluent: Union[Light, RobotLocation]
          time: int


When used explicitly, the :py:func:`~clorm.combine_fields` function takes two arguments; the
first is an optional field name argument and the second is a list of the sub-fields to
combine. Note: when trying to unify a value with a combined field the raw symbol values will be
unified with the underlying field definitions in the order that they are listed in the call to
:py:func:`~clorm.combine_fields`. This means that care needs to be taken if the raw symbol
values could unify with multiple sub-fields; it will only unify with the first successful
sub-field. In the above example this is not a problem as the two fluent field definitions do
not overlap.


Dealing with Nested Lists
-------------------------

ASP does not have an explicit representation for lists. However a common convention for
encoding lists is using a nesting of head-tail pairs; where the head of the pair is the element
of the list and the tail is the remainder of the list, being another pair or an empty tuple to
indicate the end of the list.

For example encoding a list of "nodes" [1,2,c] for some predicate ``p``, might take the form:

.. code-block:: prolog

   p(nodes,(1,(2,(c,())))).

Unfortunately, getting facts containing these sorts of nested lists into and out of Clingo can
be very cumbersome. To help support this type of encoding Clorm provides the
:py:func:`~clorm.define_nested_list_field()` function. This factory function takes an element
field class, as well as a optional parameters to control the nesting process, and returns a
newly created :class:`~clorm.BaseField` sub-class that can be used to convert to and from a
list of elements of that field class. Note, to Clorm provides implicit support for this helper
function with the extra type identifiers: ``HeadList``, ``HeadListReversed``, ``TailList``, and
``TailListReversed``. These identifiers cover the different combination of parameters for the
nesting.

 .. code-block:: python

   from clorm import Predicate, ConstantStr, HeadList

   class P(Predicate):
      param: ConstantStr
      alist: HeadList[int]

   p = P("nodes",(1,2,3))
   assert str(p) == "p(nodes,(1,(2,(3,()))))"


.. note::

   Converting a Clorm ``Predicate`` instance into a Clingo ``Symbol`` object happens at
   instance creation time. Any change to the object after object initialisation will not change
   the underlying Clingo ``Symbol`` object. Consequently, in order to avoid unexpected
   behaviour, ``Predicate`` instances should always be treated as immutable. Because of this
   when dealing with terms that are nested lists it is preferable to use Python tuples rather
   than lists; so in the above example we use ``(1,2,3)`` rather than ``[1,2,3]``.


Comparison Operators
--------------------

.. note: The following description of the comparison operator semantics applies to Clorm
   version 1.6.0 and above. Earlier versions had a more ad-hoc approach to the comparison
   operators.


The :class:`~clorm.Predicate` class overrides the standard Python comparison operators, such as
equality and the less than operators. To use the Clorm API effectively it is important to
understand how these operators are overriden.

Predicate sub-classes should be understood as implementing a *view* over Clingo ``Symbol``
objects. The view gives the user an easy and intuitive way to access the internal parameters of
the ``Symbol`` object. In the same way that the view does not alter the underlying ``Symbol``
object, the view also does not alter the behavior of the comparison operators. Therefore the
comparison operators are based purely on the the comparison of the underlying ``Symbol``
object.

One important reason to use the underlying ``Symbol`` object for the comparison operators is
that clingo guarantees an ordering over all ``Symbol`` objects. This is in contrast to Python
types where not all operators are defined for objects of different types. For example, in
Python the non-equality operators are not defined for the ``int`` and ``str`` primitive types;
for example, ``"a" < 1`` will raise a ``TypeError``. However, in ASP programming it can be
natural to compare a constant (or string) and an integer term.

This is particularly important for factbase querying, where sorting a set of facts will inherit
the ordering of the underlying ``Symbol`` object.

A second consequence of this approach is that great care should be taken when using different
:class:`~clorm.Predicate` instances that map to the same underlying ``Symbol`` object. For example,

.. code-block:: python

   from clingo import String, Function, Number
   from clorm import Raw, Predicate, ConstantStr

   class Holds1(Predicate, name="holds"):
      fluent: Raw
      time: int

   class Holds2(Predicate, name="holds"):
      fluent: int | ConstantStr
      time: int

   h1 = Holds1(fluent=Raw(Number(100)), time=1)
   h2 = Holds2(fluent=100, time=1)

   assert h1 == h2
   assert type(h1) != type(h2)
   assert str(h1) == str(h2)

   assert len({h1, h2}) == 1

In this example the comparison ``h1 == h2`` holds even though they are of different types. A
consequence of this is ``h1`` and ``h2`` cannot be stored separate within the same set object,
so a set containing this two facts has the length of 1 rather than 2. This behaviour may seem
unintuitive at first glance. However consider that the main use of :class:`~clorm.Predicate`
instances is to read/write to/from the clingo solver, and within the solver these two instances
are indistinguishable.


Old Syntax
----------

The preferred syntax for specifying predicates has changed with Clorm 1.5. The new syntax looks
very similar to standard Python dataclasses or a modern Python library such as
`Pydantic <https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/>`_. This new syntax integrates better with modern
Python programming practices, for example using linters and type checkers.

The old syntax does not use Python type annotations and instead requires the user to explicitly
define a :class:`~clorm.BaseField` sub-class for each term. It also required the use of a
``Meta`` sub-class to provide predicate meta-data, for example, to override the name of the
predicate.

 .. code-block:: python

   from clorm import Predicate, StringField, IntegerField

   class Location(Predicate):
      city = StringField
      country = StringField

      class Meta:
         name = "mylocation"

   class Booking(Predicate):
       date = StringField
       location = Location.Field


While the old syntax still works it should only be used as a fallback if it is not possible to
specify some requirement using the new syntax. The old syntax will likely be deprecated at some
point and eventually removed completely.
